Add episode 45 (#410)
trinodb/trino.io: _episodes/45.md

    [Starburst](https://starburst.io)

## Guests

* [Luis Paolini](https://www.linkedin.com/in/luispaolini/), Success Engineer at
  [Metabase](https://www.metabase.com/)
* [Andrew DiBiasio](https://www.linkedin.com/in/andrewdibiasio/), Software
  Engineer at [Starburst](https://starburst.io)
* [Piotr Leniartek](https://www.linkedin.com/in/piotrleniartek), Product Manager
  at [Starburst](https://starburst.io)

## Recap of Trino in 2022

Highlights from the blog post [The rabbit reflects on Trino in 2022]({% post_url
2023-01-10-trino-2022-the-rabbit-reflects %}) touch upon various aspects.

* Lots of growth for the community celebrating 10 years Trino
* Trino Summit, Cinco de Trino, Trino Community Broadcast, and more content
* Trino: The Definitive Guide second edition

Lots of Trino releases and new features:

* `MERGE` support
* JSON functions
* Table functions
* Fault-tolerant execution
* Upgrade to Java 17
* New Delta Lake, Hudi, and MariaDB connectors
* Tons and tons of performance improvements

## Release 407

Official highlights from Martin Traverso:

[Trino 407]({{site.url}}/docs/current/release/release-407.html)

> * 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Improved performance for highly selective queries.
* Improved performance when reading numeric, string and timestamp
  values from Parquet files.
* New `query` table function for full query pass-through in Cassandra.
* New `unregister_table` procedure in Delta Lake and Iceberg.
* Support for writing to the change data feed in Delta Lake.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cole's comments:

* For our contributors, we added a new action to track and ping on
  stale pull requests. This doesn't have any immediate impact on end
  users, but it'll improve the development and contribution process.
* A Kerberos fix for the Kudu connector should make using it much
  less of a headache on long-running Trino instances.
* There were some really sophisticated performance improvements
  that came from shifting default config values and adding some new
  ones, all of which took a whole lot of testing.
```

<img width="75%" src="/assets/episode/45/dolphin-scheduler.png">

Apache DolphinScheduler is an open-source, distributed workflow scheduling
platform designed to manage and execute batch jobs, data pipelines, and ETL
processes. DolphinScheduler enables users to create and manage consecutive jobs
run easily, including support for different types of tasks, such as SQL
statements, shell scripts, Spark jobs, Kubernetes deployments, and many others.
In short, it's a powerful and user-friendly workflow orchestration platform that
enables users to automate and manage their complex data processing tasks.

Read [this blog on Trino and Apache DolphinScheduler](https://blog.devgenius.io/dolphinscheduler-helps-trino-quickly-realize-the-integrated-data-construction-of-lake-and-warehouse-cde095b6573b)
to find out more.

### Does DolphinScheduler have any computing engine or storage layer?

DolphinScheduler is a powerful tool for managing and orchestrating data
processing workflows across a range of computing engines and storage systems,
but it does not provide its own computing or storage capabilities.

## What are the differences to other workflow orchestration systems?

> Airflow is the incumbent de facto workload orchestrator. Many data engineers 

Reviewer 2: Nice!

---
layout: episode
title: "45: Trino swimming with the DolphinScheduler"
date: 2023-02-23
tags: workflow orchestrator apache dolphinscheduler datalake
youtube_id: "YM6wXTabeWU"
wistia_id: "ui7t91altj"
sections:
   - title: "Trino Release"
     desc: "407"
     time: 802
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "What is workflow orchestration?"
     time: 1272
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Why do we need a workflow orchestration tool for building a data lake?"
     time: 1867
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "What is Apache DolphinScheduler?"
     time: 2255
   - title: "Concept of the episode"
     desc: "Does DolphinScheduler have any computing engine or storage layer?"
     time: 3191
   - title: "Concept of the episode"

>      desc: "What are the differences with other workflow orchestration, such as Apache Airflow?"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
     desc: "What are the differences from other workflow orchestration systems?"
```

an orchestration tool instead of managing by hand.

## What is Apache DolphinScheduler?

<img width="75%" src="/assets/episode/45/dolphin-scheduler.png">

Apache DolphinScheduler is an open-source, distributed workflow scheduling
platform designed to manage and execute batch jobs, data pipelines, and ETL
processes. DolphinScheduler enables users to create and manage successive jobs
run easily, including support for different types of tasks, such as SQL
statements, shell scripts, Spark, Kubernetes, and many others. In short, it's a
powerful and user-friendly workflow orchestration platform that enables users to
automate and manage their complex data processing tasks.

Read [this blog on Trino and Apache DolphinScheduler](https://blog.devgenius.io/dolphinscheduler-helps-trino-quickly-realize-the-integrated-data-construction-of-lake-and-warehouse-cde095b6573b)
to find out more.

### Does DolphinScheduler have any computing engine or storage layer?

DolphinScheduler is a powerful tool for managing and orchestrating data
processing workflows across a range of computing engines and storage systems,
but it does not provide its own computing or storage capabilities.

> ## What are the differences with other workflow orchestration, such as Apache Airflow?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What are the differences to other workflow orchestration systems?
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Need an entry level sentence about why we are comparing to Airflow

Both Dolphin Scheduler and Airflow are designed to be scalable and highly

> available which supports large-scale distributed environments well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
available to support large-scale distributed environments.
```

Airflow supports a wide range of third-party integrations, including popular
data processing frameworks such as Trino, Spark, and Flink, as well as with

> cloud services such as AWS and GCP. Dolphin Scheduler supports a similar range

Reviewer 2: as AWS and Google Cloud.

> of data processing frameworks and tools making both versatile platforms for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of data processing frameworks and tools. This makes both platforms suitable for
```

> managing diverse data processing tasks. Airflow is certainly ahead which makes

Reviewer 2: Dont say that Airflow is ahead .. when we want to talk positively about DolphinScheduler

it a more flexible solution for some workloads.

> Airflow focuses on workflow as code, meaning Airflow uses Python code to create

Reviewer 2: Too much content about Airflow .. lets cut this down to one sentence and focus on DolphinScheduler

and manage workflows. This limits the management and access to these workflows
to platform engineers and doesn't enable the option for collaborating data
management across domains. While there are third part tools that make it
possible to create Airflow DAGs in a GUI, most of them are not up-to-date with
the latest Airflow versions and not full-featured.

DolphinScheduler project believes that future data governance belongs to a

> data civilization and should not be centralized to a single team.

Reviewer 2: what does that mean? What is a "data civilization" .. probably just simplify

Product-focused engineering teams should have access to data and be able
to orchestrate workflows without the need for extensive coding skills.
DolphinScheduler uses a drag and drop web UI to create and manages workflows
while also providing programmatic access using tools like Python SDK and Open
API.

> A positive side effect of DolphinScheduler supporting users outside the data 

Reviewer 2: Lets not call it a side effect .. just call it another advantage or feature.

team through a UI is that it offers robust security features. This includes
authentication, authorization, and data encryption, to ensure that users' data

> and workflows are protected. Airflow has limited built-in security features,

Reviewer 2: Not sure we need to call out Airflow here again .. .. we can just say that DolphinScheduler has that security stuff and feature set as an advantage .. without dumping on other projects

which may require additional configuration and customization to ensure that
users' data and workflows are properly protected.

> Compared to some other workflow orchestration tools, DolphinScheduler has

Reviewer 2: Don't compare .. just state it as a fact .. its a new project .. and they are working to improve docs and community support. 

So it can also be shorter

relatively limited documentation and community support since they are a newer
community, which may make it more challenging for users to get started with the
platform. However, they have full awareness of this and are investing in
building out the community including joining talks like this.

## How does DolphinScheduler deal with failures?

Failure is an inevitable aspect of data workflow orchestration. The merits of

> many of these orchestration tools come from 

Reviewer 2: stuff still missing here

### Does DolphinScheduler have an alarm mechanism itself?

> Apache DolphinScheduler has an alarm mechanism that allows users to receive

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Apache DolphinScheduler includes an alarm mechanism that allows users to receive
```

Reviewer 2: Or maybe even just simplify .. it supports user notifications as part of a workflow

notifications and alerts when certain events or conditions occur within their
workflows. This mechanism is designed to help users monitor and manage their

> workflows more effectively and respond quickly to any issues or errors that may

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
workflows more effectively and respond quickly to any issues.
```

> arise.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

<img src="/assets/episode/45/alerts.png">

> The alarm mechanism in DolphinScheduler is implemented through a set of

Reviewer 2: This seems to repeat the earlier stuff .. so we can shorten. The main addition is the email, SMS and that included workflow stuff help

configurable alerts and notifications, which can be triggered based on various
conditions such as task failure, task success, or workflow completion. These
alerts can be configured to notify users via email, SMS, or other communication
channels, and can include details such as the name of the workflow, the name of
the failed task, and the error message or stack trace associated with the
failure.

> In addition to these configurable alerts, DolphinScheduler also provides a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition to these configurable alerts, DolphinScheduler provides a
```

> dashboard for monitoring the status and progress of workflows and tasks, which

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
dashboard for monitoring the status and progress of workflows and tasks. It 
```

includes real-time updates and visualizations of workflow performance and

> status. This dashboard can help users quickly identify any issues or bottlenecks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
status. The dashboard helps users quickly identify any issues or bottlenecks
```

in their workflows and take corrective action as needed.

<img width="80%" src="/assets/episode/45/monitoring.png">

## Demo of the episode: Creating a simple Trino workflow in DolphinScheduler

> For this episodes' demo, we will look at creating a workflow consisting of a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this episodes' demo, w look at creating a workflow consisting of a
```

> Trino query in DolphinScheduler.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Trino query execution managed by a workflow in DolphinScheduler.
```

Run the demo by following 

> [the steps listed here](https://github.com/bitsondatadev/trino-getting-started/tree/main/dolphinscheduler).

Reviewer 2: reword to avoid "here"
